gastronomicus
=============

India Mandelkern
Draft: September 13 2013: Do not Cite

Chapter Three: Dining Clubs and the Culture of Connoisseurship

Part I. Tasting Sedition

In 1711, the Honorable Archibald Campbell sent a colleague a curious list that he had recently found tucked into a copy of a book.  The list did not say very much, being little more than a transcription of ingredients and fees needed to host a large dinner.  But Campbell soon realized that this was not just any dinner.  A survey of the peculiar list implicated the notorious Calves Head Club, perhaps the most villainous secret society of the late Stuart period.  Holding evidence of their meeting in his hands confirmed Campbell’s lingering suspicions that this clandestine society of traitors not only lived, but, in fact, thrived on English soil.  In his letter Campbell swore that “this was truly the bill of their eatables, besides drink,” as it had been confirmed by “one of honour and reputation, and in a considerable publick post.”  That a “sett of men were wicked enough to meet and feast according to this bill of fare in the year of our lord 1710,” Campbell believed, was damning and undeniable evidence of each diner’s depravity.  

For Bread, Beer and Ale 3.10.0
For Fifty Calves Heads 5.5.0
For bacon 1.10.0
For 6 chickens and 2 capons 1.00.0
For three joints of Veal 1.18.0
For butter and flower 0.15.00
For Oranges, Lemmons, Vinegar and spices 1.00.0.
For anchovies capers and samphire 0.05.0
For oysters and sausages 0.15.0
For sorril, sage, parsely, sweet herbs, and onions 0.05.0
For the use of pewter and linen 1.00.0.
For firing in the kitchen 0.15.0
For firing in the parlour 0.3.0
For boat hire and porterage 0.05.0
For cook’s wages 0.15.0
For garnishing and stewing 0.05.0

Total 18.06 

First brought to the public’s attention in 1691, the Calves Head Club was known as a subversive republican association devoted to the overthrow of the monarchy.   On the anniversary of Charles I’s execution at the hands of the Rump Parliament –– the 30th of January each year –– members of the club convened for a feast commemorating the king’s beheading.  Club members were said to feast on seasoned calves’ heads (believed physically to resemble the late king’s oblong face and goatee), toast one another with red wine consumed from the empty skulls, and sing blasphemous Thanksgiving anthems.   Given that one of the first Acts of Parliament after the Restoration had decreed January 30th a fast day in order for the kingdom to atone for the regicide, participation in a calves head feast was an act of sedition punishable by death.   

Very few men, however, possessed an insider’s knowledge of the club’s scandalous activities.  The rumors circulating in print usually relied on second or third-hand testimonies, rendering Campbell’s list a powerful yet quite unusual piece of evidence.  The list described neither the feast itself nor the feast’s consequences, but instead offered a unique snapshot of the resources gathered and the skills mobilized in order to produce one of the club’s dinners.  The list’s un-stylized form imbued it with a sense of candid immediacy.   

“The Calves-Head is a Hieroglifick, or secret Representation of a thing,” noted one observer in 1692.   But what, exactly, did it represent?  Given contemporaries’ obsessive interest in the calf head’s ritualized consumption, there is good reason to believe that the answers laid latent in the ingredients selected for this semi-sacred meal.  The fifty heads heading the list stood as irrefutable proof of the members’ cannibalistic beliefs, empty vessels waiting to be consecrated with wine and incorporated into a perverse Eucharist-like consumption of the King’s body.  Readers well versed in scripture would know that the vessel’s shape echoed the bovine face of the Canaanite idol Moloch, bringing to mind the bloody human sacrifices performed in his name (Leviticus 18:21, 20: 2-5).   The ancillary ingredients listed below the heads –– the fowls, the oysters, and the copious quantities of bacon –– imbued the myth with material as well as symbolic significance.  Calves brains –– either hashed and served with fowls and bacon, or stuffed with oysters and marrow before being roasted on a spit –– had been known as English delicacies for centuries.   The dinner’s focal point thus contained complex and contradictory meanings.  Its material status as a beloved English dish piqued the observer’s palate and aroused his appetite at the same time that its mythological connotations heightened his nervous pulse.  

Equally jarring was the identification of various vegetables and herbs used to season and garnish the dinner, details usually excluded from a traditional menu or bill of fare.  These additional, somewhat ancillary details not only brought the reader into the intimacy of the kitchen as opposed to the staged formality of the dining room, but they also revealed important geographical and pharmaceutical intelligence about the club’s strategic position.   Cultivated as materia medica since Antiquity, sage was touted by 17th century herbalists for its abilities to improve memory, lubricate stiff joints, and temper the dangerous qualities of the fatty meat with which it was served.   The celebrated herbalist Nicholas Culpeper likewise believed tart, acidic sorrel, “to quench thirst, and procure an appetite in fainting or decaying stomachs,” also useful to rehabilitating and sustain an army.  Samphire, beloved for its pleasant aroma and slightly spicy taste, was also believed to aid digestion of fish and meat dishes.  The fact that the latter was gleaned nearly exclusively from Britain’s rocky coasts to the west and south suggested that the club’s extended network of Republican sympathizers had penetrated even Britain’s most remote enclaves.

More troubling still was the presence of ingredients available only beyond England’s shores.  Exotic anchovies and capers, pickled in brine, only began to be imported from the Mediterranean during the late 17th century.  Both of these ingredients became unabashedly modern flavoring agents for sauces, meat, and fish, standing in for the role that East Indian spices had once played.   Similarly, most of the coveted oranges and lemons consumed in late Stuart England hailed from Portugal or Southern Europe, although vast sums of money, time, and expertise were expended on hot-houses, specialty ovens, and state-of-the-art horticultural technology in attempts to cultivate them in the virtuoso-aristocrat’s private orchard.  Within the orange also resided a political statement.  Symbol of the Dutch house invited to invade and rule Britain in 1688, the orange came to emblematize Anglican triumph over popish tyranny.  “No flavour is better than that of the taste of an orange,” announced one broadsheet ballad published in the Revolution’s wake, also praising the orange’s health-giving abilities and perennial fruit.   For the Calves Head Club, the orange likely served as a reminder of England’s continued oppression under hereditary monarchy that remained anathema to the club’s radical republican values.  In many ways, the calf’s head remained a hieroglyphic to its contemporaries.  Its clandestine existence and its cryptic rituals ensured the public’s continued fascination.  Yet by unraveling the language of food, the hidden networks of sedition come into glaring and fleeting focus. 

The Importance of Eating Together

Despite the number of monarchist claims attesting otherwise, there is no irrefutable proof that the Calves Head Club ever existed.  Today, most historians believe that High Church Tories invented the club to undermine the legitimacy of the constitutional changes enacted under Whig rule.  There is probably some truth to this, as communal meals, especially those held in secret among a group of like-minded men, stirred powerful emotions during the late Stuart age.  In the same way that the addition of quotidian physical details made early novels seem more lifelike, direct invocation of the bodily senses –– the flavors of food, the chorus of song –– stressed the visceral immediacy of what supposedly happened behind closed doors.   The list’s charges for the boat rental and its portage from an unknown location, the rental and firing of an unnamed kitchen and parlor, and the wages paid for the labor of an anonymous cook all presupposed the existence of men in uncounted numbers secretly communicating, organizing, and, most importantly, feeding.   Taken together, the Calves Head Club’s dinners were represented as a form of political cancer quietly metastasizing off of the state’s body.  

Nor was the Calves Head Club the only target of the state’s paranoia.  While private gentleman’s clubs of all kinds became increasingly ubiquitous features of late Stuart society, membership in them lacked the respectability that it brings today in English culture.  Meeting as a “club” was usually regarded as a pejorative used to denounce the factionalism of parliamentary bodies or the profligacy of aristocratic libertines.   In contrast to the French salon, where female company civilized conversation, clubs catered exclusively to men, providing elite English social life with a more raucous, slightly bawdier reputation.  

Clubs were not explicitly food-focused.  Yet from its very beginnings, commensality was also ingrained in the club’s very definition; indeed, the OED defines a club as a “combination of contributions used to defray the expense of a communal meal.”  The growth of these associational bodies thus imbued eating and drinking rituals with new political and social significance.  One not need look far for archival proof.  A 1709 note in an anonymous society’s minute book announced exorbitant penalties for attempting to send any part of the supper out of the usual dining room.  Sneaking out leftovers could end up costing twice the price of the meal.   In 1710 the high Tory Board of Brothers threatened to expel any member who invited another member to dine privately on a designated club day.   And in 1715 the Tory Centenary Club comprised of livery-men strictly forbade any health drinking to anyone “besides “the [King], to the Church as by Law established, the absent Members, and healths of the persons present, upon the forfeitures of halfe a crowne to the use of this Society.”  

“Our modern clubs,” Joseph Addison wrote, “are founded upon Eating and Drinking, which are points wherein most Men agree, in which the Learned and the Illiterate, the Dull and the Airy, the Philosopher and the Buffoon, can all of them bear a part.”  Meals worked as important sites for social integration, and in recent years, scholars have become increasingly receptive to the fact that the Habermasian public sphere’s structural transformation largely occurred over the consumption of food and drink.  Coffeehouses and taverns were more than prime destinations for discussion and debate beyond the court’s earshot.  Over meals, alliances were forged and plans were solidified.  Sensory experience imbued anniversary meetings and charity dinners with legitimacy and meaning.   Still, historians have not credited clubs with much of a role in histories of 18th century dining and connoisseurship.   Rebecca Spang, for example, described the 18th century restaurant as a feminized, semi-aristocratic, and uniquely French institution where men and women congregated to conspicuously not eat.  More recently Denise Gigante defined gastronomy as a product of the French Revolution that did not really take off until after 1815.  Only then, she writes, was “indifference to food … no longer considered the best way to distinguish oneself as a person of taste.”   Indeed, the ‘person of taste’ seems oddly dissonant with the boozy Hogarthian licentiousness that characterizes popular perceptions of public eating and drinking during the 18th century.  Perhaps this explains why histories of clubs have taken far more of an interest in intoxicating drinks rather than foods, regardless of whether their subjects chose bitter, sobering coffee or luxurious Gallic claret as their poison.   

This inclination is misguided.  We should keep in mind that the dishes which various voluntary societies selected for their meals reflected, more often than not, conscious choices that shaped the identities of their members.  The Calves Head Club, the Beef-Steak Club, and the Kit-Kat club (named for a world-famous mutton pie before being reincarnated in the 20th century as a candy bar) all invoked particular foods as namesakes.  The same could certainly not be said for beverages.   And while satirists often used drink and drunkenness to highlight the clubman’s addiction to debauched libertinism at familial duty’s expense, contemporaries linked connoisseurship of unique foods to particular types of social and intellectual activity.   The Kit Kat’s adulation of a pie’s “Helliconian flavours,” the Tory satirist Ned Ward reported, was reputed to stimulate his creative faculties.  Mary Astell, still less enthused, compared the Kit-Kat’s eating habits to the libertine excesses of Apicius.    Likewise, members of the Beef-Steak club worshipped the noble sirloin for virility and strength.  Not only did preparing and consuming food in a ritualized manner require considerably more planning than downing a bowl of punch, but also, through the transformational processes of cooking, food underwent mythological as well as chemical transformations that informed its social meaning. 

This chapter argues that food connoisseurship was integrated into polite culture far earlier than historians have previously believed.  As clubs gradually shed their seditious trappings and metamorphosed into ubiquitous elements of metropolitan life, the symbolic significance of eating together also began to evolve.  While eating in company once echoed the commensalism of the agape, or Christian love feast, or gave tangible expression to the fraternalism of the late medieval guild, over the 18th century, communal dinners became increasingly important forums for showcasing one’s faculties of judgment and expertise.   The first evocations of the term, ‘connoisseur,’ coined by Jonathan Richardson in 1719, applied to the appreciation of art and not food.  But it was only a matter of time before connoisseurship came to shape the culture of voluntary dining.  Clubs became key sites in which new foods were experienced and evaluated for the first time.  The gentlemen of White’s Chocolate House, one satirist observed, “are no less adept in the science of Eating than Gaming.”   Parson Woodforde’s first pineapple was eaten among a bevy of male companions.   In 1755, George Colman’s satirical paper, The Connoisseur, wrote a send-up of a food-obsessed epicure who admitted members to his dining club based upon their ability to procure hard-to-get treats for the club table.  Even the modern sandwich attributed its birth to an upper crust gambling club.  In what follows, I show how, over the 18th century, clubs gradually normalized food connoisseurship as a mark of English gentlemanly cultivation.  This model of connoisseurship upheld authority as well as the existing social hierarchy that supported it.

To illustrate how connoisseurship was integrated into English culture, I use a case study: a semi-official social adjunct to the Royal Society incarnated in 1743 as “The Thursday’s Club called the Royal Philosophers.”  The politics of dining practiced among the Royal Philosophers did not stand for the experience of all social clubs in 18th century London.  Some clubs staked their reputations around highly ritualized dinners, while for others, eating was ancillary to drink and discussion.  Nor are the Royal Philosophers exactly representative of the wide social spectrum in which sociable leisure activities took place.  Nevertheless, their dinners are still meaningful to historians beyond the confines of anecdote and micro-history.  Careful reading of the club’s records demonstrates how the concept of aesthetic taste was negotiated in the culinary world.  At a time when sensual enjoyment of food still represented an indelible mark of man’s animal nature –– and thus a collapse of reason and self-control –– the Royal Philosophers turned the dinner table into a tightly regulated social laboratory whereby enterprising gentlemen could cultivate both their palates and their minds.   Food connoisseurship thereby enabled club members to articulate their own identities and values, and to project them on their peers. 

The extraordinary detail and breadth of the Royal Philosophers’ records also warrants a new approach to the history of 18th century associational life.  Behavioral norms and preferences are notoriously difficult to measure, and scholars for the most part have been reluctant to attempt to assess them with any quantitative rigor.   Yet a prosopographical approach –– searching for common characteristics underlying large data samples –– makes good methodological sense when applied to an ineffable, formless, and subjective faculty such as taste.   Without the fervid restaurant-reviewing mentality of today, finding written records about one’s subjective gustatory preferences during the 18th century can be a difficult task.  But this does not mean that food connoisseurship did not matter.  Instead, attitudes towards food connoisseurship are better evaluated by examining behavioral patterns and changes in taste unfolding over time.  The Royal Philosophers’ unusually meticulous records make possible this kind of analysis.  Not only did the club keep detailed records of annual meetings charting minutes, elections of new members, accounts, and revisions to the rules, but also, unlike most other clubs, the Philosophers kept separate dinner books that dutifully noted each dish consumed at every Thursday dinner as well as every man in attendance.   The fact that these seemingly unremarkable data have been so carefully preserved was not the result of luck.  Rather, these records reflected the extent to which the Baconian values upon which the Royal Society was founded –– curiosity, collection, experiment, and record –– applied to alimentary matters.  As historians, we should take the club members’ rigor seriously.

Part II: Dining as a Science of Sociability

The Thursday’s Club called the Royal Philosophers proclaimed its official foundation on October 27, 1743: 

“A dinner to be ordered every Thursday for six at 1.6 per head eating.
As many more as come to pay 1.6 a head eating.
If fewer than six come the deficiency to be paid out of the fund subscribed
A pint of wine to be paid for every one that comes, let the number be what it will, and no more unless they drink more than that amounts to.”

Unlike the Royal Society, to which six of the eight founding members belonged, the Royal Philosophers neither professed to advance the state of learning in Great Britain nor pledged to pursue any natural philosophical truths. No codes of behavior are mentioned, as its members came self-selected.   Only the fees and prices requisite for dining in the club were transcribed, ostensibly to ensure that meetings would occur regularly and to mollify potential arguments over the bill.  This was unusual for many contemporary clubs, which often enacted strict regulations to restrict swearing, gambling, and drinking too much and out of turn. 

Every Thursday from 1748 to 1780, the club convened at the Mitre Tavern on Fleet Street, conveniently situated across the street from the Royal Society’s address on Crane Court.   Members convened for dinner at 4 p.m. and continued until the Royal Society’s official meeting began at 8 p.m. that same evening.  Boasting several private rooms designated for private functions, the Mitre was no stranger to London’s flourishing associational culture.  From the mid-1720s, it had hosted gatherings of Freemasons and Antiquaries, alumni gatherings, and medical societies.    Throughout the mid 18th century, Samuel Johnson and his circle patronized the tavern; James Boswell recalled having “a good supper and port wine,” there in the 1760s.  By and large, the Mitre catered to the well-to-do.  A criminal deposition transcribed in 1785 emphasized that fact that the establishment had traditionally served “all in [silver] plate,” and the occasional broken glass or dish noted in the club dinner books reveals that the tableware was worth a pretty penny.   Less is known about the specific room in which the club dined each Thursday, but scattered asides noted in the dinner books suggest that space was tight.  More often than not, the members made do; on only one occasion did they separate into two separate rooms in order to dine. 

Once elected into the club, new members paid six shillings –– the cost of four dinners –– as a subscription fee, creating a fund from which to tip the cooks and waiters, pay for the carriage and portage of edible gifts and the claret toasts they exhorted, and diffuse the expense of under-attended meals.   Even increasing the admission fee to twenty-one shillings in 1749 did not seem to inhibit the club from occasionally falling into debt, requiring members to contribute a few extra shillings every couple of years. Consequently, member loyalty varied considerably.  The club always had a discernable cadre of core members who attended regularly, as well as a larger, peripheral membership who attended on a sporadic basis.  
 

Figure 1: Strength of Association 1748-1780
While thousands of new associations were made as men were brought into contact with one another, the connections among the core members remained most powerful

Loyalty can also be calculated by analyzing the length of tenures in the club.  In the interest of its non-local members, many of whom were aristocrats, the club only required each member to attend at minimum one dinner per year –– to attend less was grounds for expulsion.  This still did not prevent many men from forfeiting their membership by non-attendance or failure to pay fees.  Still other members actively resigned.  Because tenures varied so widely, as exhibited below, it is unlikely that the Thursday’s Club served only one universal function in its members’ lives. 
 

Figure 2: Length of Tenure in the Club: 1748-1780

While its members’ conviction varied a great deal –– tenures could range from 3 to 50 years  –– in an era when the rapid rise and fall of most clubs within a couple of years testified to the intransigent superficiality of 18th century sociability, the Thursday’s Club was unusual for the consistency of its meetings.  Total dinner attendance ranged from as few as three to as many as thirty-three, yet, unless the meeting was cancelled, as it was when it fell on St. Andrew’s Day or Christmas, men always showed up, with the average hovering around 13 men per meal. 
 
Figure 3: Number of Attendees per Meeting (1748-1780)

 
Figure 4: Attendance Patterns of Members and Guests (1748-1783)

What explains the Thursday’s Club’s remarkable longevity?  While the absence of a mission statement might imply that members came together each week simply to enjoy a good meal and good company, the practiced imposition of rules and regularity upon the dinner clearly distinguished the insiders from the rest of the Royal Society’s fellowship.  While the Royal Society itself boasted over 300 fellows by 1740, a 1748 rule fixed membership in the Thursday’s Club at just 40 men.   A seat could open in only three ways: non-attendance for over a year, willful resignation, or death.  Contemporaries interpreted this exclusivity as evidence of growing factionalism among the fellowship, thus presaging its intellectual devolution.   As early as 1709, Ned Ward ridiculed a so-called “Vertuoso’s Club” that lost its once grand reputation due to its foolish and contrived experiments.  Throughout the 18th century, the Royal Society continued to battle the image of the pedantic virtuoso so obsessed with collecting curiosities that he forsook the company of men.  Yet beginning during the 1730s and 40s, the Royal Society faced an attack on a second front.  Once lampooned for excessive interest in knowledge that was new but unuseful, now, members were attacked for their apathy towards any kind of knowledge at all.  The botanist John Hill, a former Royal Society reject who thereafter became its most vociferous critic, attributed the Royal Society’s skewed priorities to the cliquish world of the tavern and coffeehouse in his scathing Dissertation on Royal Societies (1750), complaining that meetings were dominated by the “redoubled Clamour of a whole Society talking at once; some of where they had dined, some of where they intended to sup.”   Not only was the Thursday’s Club often held responsible for the Royal Society’s turn towards excess and frivolity, but also, being the largest and most powerful faction within the Royal Society, it was frequently blamed for rubber-stamping then President Martin Folkes’s mismanagement of the Royal Society’s affairs.  Since 1747, Club members had been in the habit of electing the President of the Royal Society to be also the President of the club.  (This rule was officially codified in 1766.)  This double-Presidency led the jaded antiquarian William Stukeley to disparage the Thursday’s Club as a “junto of sycophants … that exclude all members that know more than themselves.”  

The Royal Society’s party line, unsurprisingly, tells a very different story.   In his comprehensive biography of the club published in 1979, F.R.S. T.E. Allibone argued that the Thursday’s Club merely continued the Royal Society’s rich tradition of convivial gathering traceable back to its Gresham College days; indeed; the well-known diaries of Samuel Pepys and Robert Hooke testified to the tavern and coffeehouse’s well-worn roles as hubs of leisure as well as intellectual exchange.  In these informal settings animated by food and drink, learned discussion contrasted sharply with the rigid Oxbridge academic curriculum.  The proliferation of private clubs over the 18th century merely continued this proud tradition.  In fact, Allibone pointed to three smaller social networks from which the Thursday’s Club drew its ranks: Edmund Halley’s club that reputedly began to meet in 1731, Martin Folkes’s circle that gathered weekly at the Sun Tavern in St. Paul’s Churchyard, and, later, Matthew Maty’s “Thursday teas” that began in 1751.   We should keep in mind, however, that Allibone was himself a member of the same club (now named the Royal Society Club) and as we shall see, even some of the most well meaning 18th century members were guilty of inflating the club’s historical importance.

Yet questions still remain unanswered.   These histories do not explain why none of these others groups of colleagues who dined together ever adopted the formality and rigor with which the Thursday’s Club organized nor do they explain its unusual longevity.  Most importantly, these histories fail to provide any convincing reason why, in 1748, a subgroup of men deemed it worth the effort to keep such meticulous records about what they ate for dinner and with whom.  In what follows, I consider the Club’s agendas in context of first, the Royal Society’s mid-century intellectual pursuits, and second, contemporary understandings of polite association.  I then examine how dinners were deployed to achieve them. 

Scientific and Social Pursuits

The Royal Philosophers were a heterogeneous group of gentlemen.  From 1748-1785, members included noblemen and tradesmen, doctors and lawyers, politicians and clergymen, Whigs and Tories.  Given the fluidity of 18th century disciplinary boundaries and the subjective standards of professional expertise, assessing the club’s collective intellectual character is not an easy task.  Some members held university chairs in their respective academic disciplines, while others nourished only amateur interests in the sciences.  Nevertheless, by examining the biographies of the core membership, one can isolate several disciplinary areas that likely brought these men together.  We might never know what the Philosophers discussed over dinner, yet by examining their intellectual pursuits, we might infer the purposes that their meetings served. 

 For nearly a century and a half, scholars have interpreted the pithy numbers of theoretical physicists and mathematicians among the Royal Society’s 18th century ranks as evidence of its intellectual decline or euphemistically equivalent “literary” character.   Only over the past twenty years have scholars such as David Philip Miller and Richard Sorrenson challenged this interpretation by pointing to the rise of instrument making, shipbuilding, and other instances of applied mathematics among the Fellowship.   These occupational changes accompanied social changes, albeit modest ones.  While aristocrats with little scientific training continued to be inducted on a regular basis, this should not overshadow the growing numbers of apothecaries and tradesmen –– men who had to work for a living –– among the Royal Society’s ranks.  

These general trends are also true of the Thursday’s Club. The first forty members to be inducted included many members of the landed gentry and one peer, but also men of more mercenary occupations.  In fact, several men resigned from the club because they were unable to balance their busy work schedules with their social obligations.   Nor did members resist putting their scientific learning to popular and commercial use.  Many active early members, such as William Watson, Charles Feake, and Gowin Knight, participated in the new and infectious discoveries in magnetism and electricity that captivated urban crowds.  Others readily involved themselves in London’s newest and most scientifically progressive charity, the Foundling Hospital, serving as physicians, administrators, and trustees.   Perhaps nowhere were the practical applications of theoretical science more prominent than in overseas imperial and military ventures.  Through the publication of several well-received treatises on gunnery, for example, Benjamin Robins, inducted in 1746, brought Newtonian mathematics to the military.  Sir John Pringle, inducted in 1752 and eventually elected president in 1771, profoundly shaped military medicine through his extensive work on fevers, hygiene, and the spread of infectious disease.   Applied science was also harnessed to the measure and management of geographical space.  Many of the early members, such as George Graham and Captain Christopher Middleton, dedicated their careers to the science of navigation.    Throughout the 18th century, surveyors, cartographers and astronomers continued to be inducted in large numbers.  

 Yet the Philosophers’ most ubiquitous shared interest was a passion for history.  Throughout the span of the records, substantial numbers of men enjoyed simultaneous membership in both the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries.   So much did the two clubs overlap that the Antiquaries also met on Thursdays at the Mitre Tavern, commencing their meeting after the Philosophers had wrapped up.  Within this same ten-year time frame, members published articles in Philosophical Transactions and elsewhere about everything from ancient Roman walls to medieval theologians to the Domesday Book to the history of clock making.  

Scholars have considered the substantial overlap among the F.R.S and the F.S.A. as even more evidence of the Royal Society’s increasingly frivolous and amateurish demeanor.  But even though antiquarianism was admittedly a hobby rather than a professional occupation for most of the Fellowship, this did not mean that their studies lacked methodological rigor on par with natural philosophical inquiries.   This is exemplified in the Reverend Thomas Birch’s (1705-1766) ambitious General Dictionary, Historical and Critical (1734-1741), recognized today as an important ancestor to the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.  Compiling and editing its ten volumes required Birch to subject historical writing to the strictures of empirical precision.  The first volume’s preface lauded the “exact, faithful, and disinterested Historian” who had approached the inner workings of the human mind with mechanistic precision.  Only by dispassionate analysis, by isolating “the several springs of their actions,” Birch claimed, could biographers assess past and future judgments of their historical subjects.  Readers in search of romance and rhetorical flourish were bound to be disappointed, Birch cautioned, for the work was so thorough that it “sometimes … seems to be written merely for the sake of the notes.”  Editing the General Dictionary even exhorted Birch to invent new types of bibliographical citation, the merits of which helped win him admission to the Royal Society in 1734.   Thus, while scholars have often fixated on the widening epistemological gulf between historical and scientific evidence taking place over the 17th and 18th centuries, this hardly precluded historical scholarship from being taken seriously as a form of scientific learning.  We should keep in mind that the first four librarians of the British Museum –– Gowin Knight, Matthew Maty, Charles Morton, and Joseph Planta –– were all loyal members of the Thursday’s Club during the 18th century.

Even when produced and circulated in a literary format, history was pedagogically meaningful as a rational investigation of the human mind.  This is exemplified in the Athenian Letters, or the epistolary correspondence of an agent of the king of Persia, which retold events of the Peloponesian Wars through the correspondence of Cleander, a Persian diplomat stationed in Athens during the crisis.  The text claimed to be an authentic rendering of a Spanish manuscript passed through several kingdoms and several translations before eventually finding its way into the hands of an English consul stationed in Tunis.  But in reality it was co-authored by several of the club’s core members and published anonymously in four volumes in 1741 and 1743.  

Inspired by Thucydides’s 5th century B.C. account, the Athenian Letters was noteworthy for its detailed portrayal of the diverse beliefs and social customs practiced throughout the ancient Mediterranean world.  The work examines rival educational systems, legal systems, religious rites, and feasting rituals; more cultural insight, it boasted, than the “most formal and elaborate treatises of grave antiquaries.”  Not only did the inclusion of these details reflect the authors’ expert handle of both Ancient and Modern styles of learning –– combining mastery of classical rhetoric with antiquarian interest in material culture –– but more consequentially, it provided readers a new approach to the study of human behavior.   Echoing Birch’s preface to the General Dictionary almost verbatim, the preface to the Letters also lauded the work’s ability to unravel the “secret springs” and “true causes” of human decision-making and action.   “I know your penetrating eye is not contented with surveying the outward appearances of things,” Cleander writes to his counselor in the opening pages of the text.  Instead he praises his master’s interest in the underlying principles that shape political events: “the most refined secrets of policy” and “the constitutions of different states.”  A savvy politician must therefore conduct diplomacy by taking into account the “natural dispositions of the people” and “the tempers of their rules.” Only by subjecting cultural differences to rational investigation might diplomacy effectively be marshaled.  

This new approach served a political as well as a pedagogical purpose.  As Lawrence Klein has emphasized, the 18th century philosophy of politeness postulated by the third Earl of Shaftesbury celebrated Greece –– and especially Athens –– as the paragon of cultural refinement and political liberty.   Celebrating Athens therefore presupposed an alternative model of cultural progress that substituted public oratory and learned conversation for the Church and the court’s influence.  Thus, not only was there an implicit political statement within the selection of Athens for this collaborative project, but also in doing so, the Athenian Letters offered readers a “polite” model of dining that accorded with it.  In one his of first letters home upon his arrival in Athens, Cleander observed: 

“The Asiatic feasts are remarkable for the vast quantities of provisions, the costliness of the preparations, and the sumptuous furniture; the chief recommendation of a Greek one is, the elegance and variety of the table-talk, so that an Athenian said prettily enough, our entertainments do not only please, when we give them, but the day after.”   
	
Conviviality did not have to occur at cultivation’s expense; in fact, the two could reinforce one another.  In the same fashion, Cleander praised the Greeks’ sense of hospitality as well as the boozy gaiety of their symposia.   Yet as the war carried on, several ominous symptoms of Asiatic luxury began to appear in Athenian culture, which “like a fatal pestilence … [had] occasioned such desolation in [the Persian] empire.”   By the sixth year of the war, this infection manifested itself in the Athenians’ sacrificial rites, as Athenians abandoned their former offerings of simple cakes and water made as expressions of gratitude and dependence in favor of elaborate animal sacrifices explicitly made to curry favor with their gods.  So intricate and conspicuous had sacrificial rites become, Cleander bemoaned, that each “deity had his favorite animal.”  Even the gods were treated as foodies. 

What then was polite dining to look like?  As much as the ideal borrowed from the elegant social discourse typified by classical Athens, it also inherited practices from its enemy Sparta.  While the Spartan taste had little to recommend it to its Persian correspondents –– one criticized the “black broth and the sordid diet of this city” –– they were impressed nonetheless by the “remarkably improving” nature of the Spartan table talk, which limited conversation to virtue, liberty, and “contempt of other nations.”   In many ways, in fact, the tightly monitored commensality of Spartan eating protocols closely resembled those followed by the Thursday’s Club:  

“Each table has a select company; and no man is admitted to any one of them, without the general consent of the members, who frequent it.  This is done with a view to prevent any interruption in the conversation, and that no citizen may be uneasy at the seasons appointed for relaxation.  Every man sends in a monthly contribution for the maintenance of the entertainments, and it is expected, he should come thither, without having privately feasted at his own house.”   

Like the moralistic articles circulated in London’s popular weeklies, the detailed cultural observations penned by Cleander and his Mediterranean network of correspondents worked as thinly veiled critiques of the English public’s consuming habits.  In Cleander’s elaborate descriptions of Athens, English readers surely would have detected traces of their own kingdom: a rising naval power, rich in culture and virtue, yet increasingly beholden to its subjects’ desires for new knowledge and wealth.  But this was precisely the point.  History for the Thursday’s Club operated as a political tool that upheld the Whig status quo as the natural keeper of dispassionate historical knowledge. This message also reverberates through Reverend Thomas Birch’s work.  Son of a coffee-mill maker with upwardly mobile aspirations, Birch was indebted to the Royal Society for his social and material successes and was thus naturally inclined to memorialize its accomplishments.   Throughout his career he canonized the achievements of those whom he believed to represent the triumphant progress of English values, authoring biographies of figures such as Robert Boyle (1744) and Queen Elizabeth I (1754).  Most ambitious was the History of the Royal Society (1756-1757), a sprawling four-volume chronicle of the Royal Society’s minutes compiled and reproduced in exhaustive detail.  Yet in spite of their self-serving political agenda, the Club’s interest in history did not occur at curiosity’s expense.  To the contrary, history rendered human sociability and behavior important subjects of learned investigation.  It was only a matter of time, therefore, before the Philosophers realized that their historical interest could be enhanced by directed study of themselves.  

Dining as a Polite Science

The Royal Philosophers’ enlightened interest in culture’s classical legacies coincided with broader changes in English social mores.  Understanding the institutions of social discourse was fascinating to the virtuoso in its own right, but it was also increasingly necessary for survival in polite society.  As the competitive courtly civility of earlier days was gradually uprooted by the urbane virtues of the Town, 18th century standards of conduct adopted an increasingly associational character.  This was manifested in the explicitly interactive qualities that inhered in the ideal gentleman.   Displaying one’s altruism, compassion, generosity, and wit was essential.  Visits and social calls became routine elements of fashionable urban life.   Needless to say, these qualities were best cultivated through purposeful association.  As early as 1711, the third Earl of Shaftesbury had defended the club as an authentic expression of man’s natural inclination to socialize with his peers.  Sociable fellowship, Shaftesbury argued, was as important to his survival as his need to eat and drink.    Freeform discussion and debate taking place among a group of friends not only liberated conversation from the “formality of business,” and the “tutorage and dogmaticalness of the schools,” but it also improved its participants by smoothing over their less desirable characteristics.  “To restrain this,” he warned, “is inevitably to bring a rust upon men’s understandings.” Writing in the same vein nearly 40 years later, Lord Chesterfield similarly stressed the importance of social activity to the gentleman’s education.  “It is by conversations, dinners, suppers, entertainments,” he wrote in 1750, “in the best companies, that you must be formed for the world.”  

Historians rarely associate polite cultivation with dinners, and still less with dinners that took place among the supposedly bawdy and libertine excesses of 18th century tavern life. After all, unlike the mental satisfaction derived from appreciating a work of art, the pleasures of the palate could not be wholly divorced from the stomach’s instinctive desire to preserve the body at all costs.  Yet dining was critical to the gentlemanly cultivation for three reasons.  First, with all its cultural accouterments used to distinguish itself from mere feeding –– the cutlery, the service, and the proprietary customs –– social distinctions were easily measured, allowing for boundaries to be drawn.   Second, under the right conditions, communal eating and drinking was believed to fuel authentic social commerce.  Convivial fellowship could free conversation from artifice, creating a community of mutual charity and honor.   In the ancient tradition of the Christian love feast, eating with the right company authenticated spiritual bonds among diners.  And last, quite simply, dinners were important because they were occasions where deals were solidified and favors were exchanged.  Foreigners frequently commented upon the gravity with which the English took ceremonies.   Simply being there, in Paul Langford’s terms, constituted “a kind of public legitimacy.”

These two impulses are felt throughout the span of the club’s records, which from 1748 until his death in 1775, were maintained by the Club’s punctilious treasurer, Josiah Colebrooke.  He was also the most devoted member, attending over 1100 dinners throughout his thirty-two year tenure at the Thursday’s Club.  An apothecary by trade, Colebrooke also avidly studied antiquities and numismatics; he doubled as treasurer to the Society of Antiquaries.   Like Thomas Birch, Colebrooke viewed his secretarial duties in greater historical terms, never hesitating to invoke the opinion of “posterity” or “some future philosopher” when rules risked being violated.  Also like Birch, Colebrooke organized the club’s dinners with pride and scientific precision, taking great care to carefully describe any new dish he was served for the future analysis of posterity, which was recorded in his graceful and metronomic hand.   Indeed, by regulating the conditions in which eating occurred, under Colebrooke’s stewardship the table was transformed into a laboratory for polite cultivation.  Each week he pre-ordered from the tavern proprietor a “commons” –– a set meal large enough to feed a designated number of men –– to be shared by the attending diners.  Colebrooke determined the commons’ size based on his educated guess of who would attend.  The dinner was held in the same private room in the Mitre each week; he recorded his displeasure in the rare circumstances that they had to be relocated.  Only on the anniversary dinner day, held every third Thursday of July, could existing rules be reviewed or revoked, and new members voted in. 

Regulation of the social environment was even more critical to cultivating politeness than was the regulation of physical space.  Inducted members came and went as they pleased, yet managing non-subscribers who ate at the club was a constant source of anxiety.  The Thursday’s Club was unusual for its consistently high numbers of guests, for which the club’s first president, Martin Folkes, was certainly responsible.  Ever since his election to the presidency of the Royal Society in 1741, Folkes had sought to spread the Royal Society’s influence and reputation across the Continent, and he saw in the Thursday’s Club a useful technology of public relations.   Within the rigorously policed confines of the clubroom, the act of eating together –– collectively dividing, consuming, and internalizing the outside world into the body –– converted various professional, collegiate, and civic relationships into familiar, kin-like ones.  The strictures of politeness virtually dictated that the provision of food and hospitality was socially and emotionally reciprocated, thus fostering alliances and cooperative relationships.  Perhaps we should not blame outsiders such as Hill and Stukeley, who saw the club as a symptom of the Royal Society’s intellectual stagnation.  By holding the dinner before the official meeting actually took place, attendees could discuss, strategize, and solidify their plans in order to more effectively leverage their influence upon the Society’s decisions.  It is likely no coincidence that the club’s records began almost immediately following Folkes’s election to the Thursday’s club in 1747. But even after Folkes’s death, guests continued to appear frequently, comprising about one fifth, on average, of each meal’s attendance. 

Guests comprised an incredibly heterogeneous group.  Over the course of the records, the Thursday’s Club entertained Polish princes, Russian dignitaries, Italian mathematicians, as well as English celebrities, politicians, and members of other London scientific societies.  Still more remarkable were the non-Western visitors to the Philosopher’s table, such as Thayendanegea, the Mohawk Chief who had aided the British in the Revolutionary War, the famous Tahitian celebrity Omai, and Chet Quang and Wang Tong, two Chinese men who came accompanied by interpreters.  This constant rotation of foreign and domestic visitors allowed the members to showcase their social dexterity as polite hosts.  Not only was conversation with one’s peers important, but the ideal gentleman also was required to converse freely with those of different rank, station and culture.  His reputation depended not only on his ability to converse with guests, but also on how sociable and erudite his respective guests were perceived. 

Guests also ensured the club’s preservation.  The additional dinner fees paid by invited guests helped Colebrooke achieve the tavern proprietor’s minimum “quota” of twelve meals per dinner, obviating the need to dip into the club fund to pay for the deficiency.  Further, repeated invitations doubled as vetting processes whereby aspiring Philosophers sought to demonstrate their social virtues in addition to impressing the members on paper.  Indeed, nearly every new member had dined as a visitor at least several times before even being nominated by a member.  Some attended over 70 dinners as a guest before receiving an official nomination, while others remained on the balloting list for a decade before being inducted as a Royal Philosopher.  The election of new members was a no less weighty task.  Elections were held only once per year by those present at the anniversary meeting and dinner, which occurred every final Thursday of July.  Visitors were prohibited from attending this special meeting, and venison for dinner that day usually sanctified the occasion.  The most frequent attendees at this annual meeting thus wielded the most control over the admission of new members.  These men made up a core clique of their own, consisting of the close friends and antiquaries James Burrow (31 elections) Daniel Wray (27 elections) and Josiah Colebrooke (26 elections).

The club also took almost fetishistic pleasure in passing strict measures designed to prevent non-subscribers from entering the clubroom and freely cavorting with the members. In March, 1749, only six months after the club began to meet formally, a note signed by 22 members required that “all gentlemen who are not subscribers themselves must be introduced by a subscriber present each time they dine here” and that “this order be written and fixed up at the door.”  Apparently still unsatisfied, several months later the Philosophers agreed to ban all “strangers” from the club except those introduced by the President.  Subsequent rules imposed even more stringent requirements upon the election of new members, reducing the number of permissible “negative” votes for election from 5 to 3 (July, 1760), and renewing the request that strangers be officially introduced by the club President (July, 1766).  In 1766, Colebrooke also began to keep count of which members had invited which visitors and how often.  In 1775, lest any guest became too chummy with the members, the club collectively decided that “no Stranger be admitted two successive Thursdays” (July 1775).  Only by these means could polite cultivation be properly monitored. 

Carving out this polite space for dining did not mean that influence within the club was more meritocratic.  While dinners served to integrate traditional and newer elites, the club never severed its ties to its aristocratic patrons, the most influential of whom was the antiquarian and politician Philip Yorke.  Heir to the powerful Earl of Hardwicke, a major player in the House of Lords, Philip was admitted into the Royal Society in 1741 and the Society of Antiquaries in 1744, and eventually succeeded to his father’s title in 1764.  Yorke surrounded himself with men who shared his political as well as intellectual interests; Horace Walpole once described him as “historically curious” and inclined to like anyone who could send him “uncommon letters, papers, manifestoes, and things of that sort.”   Many members of the club’s inner circle, such as Thomas Birch, Daniel Wray, and William Heberden, were his friends as well as his clients.  D.P Miller has shown how remarkably resilient his network was, dominating the Royal Society’s politics and intellectual pursuits until Joseph Banks’s election to the Royal Society’s Presidency in 1778.    Second only to Yorke in his largesse to the Thursday’s Club was Anthony Ashton Cooper, the Earl of Shaftesbury’s own son and successor.  The fourth earl devoted much of his life to the avid study of his father’s works, preparing a new edition the Characteristics in 1732.  He was inducted into the Royal Society in 1754 and became an honorary member of the club shortly thereafter.  Members of the nobility such as Yorke and Shaftesbury rarely attended the club’s meetings themselves, yet they made their presence felt in other ways.  Indeed, the ties between patron and client, and between hereditary privilege and polite aspiration, were reenacted each time that the club feasted on the shipments of venison that they sent without fail to be consumed on one Thursday each year.

PART III: Standards of Taste 

I have discussed how the dinner table worked as a site for polite cultivation.  But the particular foods consumed at table also shaped the diners’ status as learned gentlemen.  As politeness was not an innate state of mind but a collection of behavioral protocols, it was always suspect as a soulless instrument used for personal advancement.  Thus, equally if not more important to a man’s social identity was his sense of taste, which was understood as an innate faculty of mind capable of appreciating truth and beauty.   In contrast to the excessive and seemingly unrestrained consuming habits of England’s growing commercial society, which made once exclusive status symbols available for purchase, taste could not be bought or sold.  Nor did it have anything to do with utility; if it did, Adam Smith cautioned in the Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), it had to be either a coincidence or an afterthought.   Taste was too immediate to include any practical applications in its definition; many considered it to be a sixth sense.   One might be able to train it, but it could not be mastered by devouring conduct manuals.  One knew it when one saw it; but it was impossible to describe in words.  “Too volatile to endure the chains of a description,” Edmund Burke wrote, a systematic science of cultural appreciation always remained elusive. 

There was one thing that all aesthetic philosophers could agree on, however.  The presence of food and drink at the table threw a wrench to the cultivation of aesthetic taste.  After all, eating was useful –– necessary, in fact –– thus compromising its aesthetic autonomy.  After all, Edmund Burke questioned in 1757, how could one know that one’s appreciation of a fine dish came responded to an artful mixture of flavors and not the sated stomach?   Others put more faith in food’s aesthetic capacities.  In his 1752 essay on refinement in the arts, David Hume described eating and drinking as provisionally tasteful activities depending on the quantity of food consumed.  Gorging on excessive amounts of meat distinguished the gluttonous barbarian from the refined gentleman of taste.   While they never reached a complete consensus, philosophers and physicians alike agreed that eating and drinking the wrong foods in the wrong quantities could harm the discerning faculties.  Just like the five principal senses, the faculty of aesthetic judgment could degenerate if the body was improperly managed.  Sensory overindulgence –– eating the wrong food, drinking the wrong libation –– was particularly worrisome.  

The remainder of this chapter examines how the Thursday’s Club transformed eating into a practice of aesthetic connoisseurship.  By repackaging the members’ food choices into collective expressions of social and civic values, the Club constructed an ideal palate suitable to the learned English gentleman. 

The Bill of Fare 

Before turning to the food itself, it is worth looking at the genre in which food choices were organized and compiled.  For thousands of years, men have been arranging foods within self-conscious rituals and codifying them for posterity.   But this does not mean that their meanings have always remained constant.  With its varied selection, its fixed prices, and its a la carte servings, historians have described the printed menu as a representation of 19th century liberal modernity.   They have had far less to say about the bill of fare, its more obscure and less conspicuous ancestor.  The OED’s 16th century definition of the bill of fare classifies the term as a ‘program’ to a banquet or feast.  The fact that the term eventually came to be used interchangeably with the modern menu has led scholars to underestimate its significance.  Nor was the English bill of fare as old or ubiquitous as we would probably like to think.  Its use was mostly confined to courtly banquets before the mid-17th century.  Because it celebrated the act of conspicuous consumption within a subsistence-based society, the bill of fare had little utility without a sizeable and well-fed reading public willing to pay it any attention.

Once adopted by fashionable eating-houses, aristocratic homes, and the cookbooks written to service them, the bill of fare gradually became a handmaiden to a new and more self-conscious system of food presentation and service.  Beginning in the 18th century, fashionable homes began to present meals in a style known as service a la francais, supposedly borrowed from Louis XIV’s absolutist court.   In this mode of presentation, large platters of dressed food –– hot and cold, sweet and savory –– were brought to the table and simultaneously laid out in a carefully ordered and symmetrical fashion.   This style of food service sought to transform the dinner table into a multi-sensory spectacle of unending variety and abundance.  No one diner was expected to eat everything placed on the table.  The bill of fare thus worked as a surrogate host.  By elucidating a large dinner’s plentiful contents, the bill of fare helped diners navigate the table by ensuring that each diner selected only the dishes that suited his taste and constitution. 

The bill of fare’s utility as a map or guide also made it important to the burgeoning cookbook trade.  Unlike its predecessors, the modern 18th century cookbook aggressively courted the upwardly mobile by including sample bills of fare designed to be replicated on special occasions. These texts taught readers about the latest fashionable dishes appropriate for the season, and were often supplemented by elaborate fold out plates to show readers how to arrange them on the table.   Oftentimes these plates depicted banquets enjoyed at royal and aristocratic tables so that readers could emulate the culinary fashions of their social betters.  The bill of fare thus exhorted readers to think about dining in increasingly aesthetic terms.  It both stylized the meal according to aristocratic tastes and offered readers a program to refine their gastronomic knowledge and hone their own preferences.

Given its status as an eating ‘guide,’ small wonder that bills of fare appeared so frequently in the rapidly burgeoning world of print culture.  They made good metaphorical sense as an enticing preview of what readers could expect to follow, and for this reason, book prefaces of all genres often modeled themselves on this culinary image.  Further, given England’s diverse reading public that unevenly consumed and digested texts at various speeds and competencies, the simplistic structure of the bill of fare was easily accessible.  The appearance of word-games and puzzles that echoed its format testified to its growing ubiquity in popular culture.   At the same time, however, contemporaries acknowledged its purely representational status.  “A hungry appetite may perhaps grieve, to heare such a Banquet let forth in a Song,” confessed one 17th century broadside ballad, yet “All that I can doe, is with words to display, What we had to Supper on Saturday night.”    Journalists were extremely conscious that the ingestion of textual representations –– as a bill of fare or otherwise –– could not offer material nourishment but instead abetted alimentary desire.  In 1712, Joseph Addison joked that that readers of the Spectator probably used past issues of the periodical to wrap up spices and mutton pies.   By mid-century, the popular satirist George Colman cursed the over-zealous epicure who devoured piles of cookbooks in order to arouse his pithy shrunken appetite.   

The bill of fare’s literary and social significations famously inhere in the opening lines of Henry Fielding’s Tom Jones (1749).

“To prevent therefore giving Offence to their Customers by any such Disappointment, it hath been usual, with the honest and well-meaning Host, to provide a Bill of Fare, which all Persons may peruse at their first Entrance into the House; and, having thence acquainted themselves with the Entertainment they may expect, may either stay and regale with what is provided for them, or may depart to some other Ordinary better accommodated to their Taste.”  

Unlike eating in the home of a private acquaintance, where unwritten strictures of hospitality and propriety dictated one’s taste, Fielding compared the smorgasbord of characters and conflicts in his novel to the bill of fare one might find in a tavern or public house, where “all persons [were] welcome for their Money.”  This did not mean that each patron selected whatever he pleased, as personal taste was inevitably dictated by one’s ability to pay the bill.  Higher costs bred higher expectations; “[m]en who pay for what they eat,” Fielding observed, “will insist on gratifying their Palates, however nice and whimsical these may prove,” and “if every Thing is not agreeable to their Taste, will challenge a Right to censure, to abuse, and to d--n their dinner without Control.”  Humbler men, on the other hand, will relish every morsel their stomachs could contain.  Similar to the novelistic genre itself, Fielding depicted the tavern as a laboratory in which one could observe the processes whereby tastes emerged from the repeated collisions among different characters and interests. 

Ever since the publication of Levi-Strauss’s canonical investigation of Amerindian mythologies, The Raw and the Cooked (1964), scholars have waxed ad nauseum about the spiritual transformation of nature into culture wrought by cooking.   The bill of fare took this metamorphosis still further by organizing the different cultural goods created in the kitchen into an elaborated social ritual grounded in space and time.  Each dish contained therein scripted the meal’s cultural, social, and political significance.  We therefore should not overlook the bills of fare transcribed in the Thursday’s Club’s dinner books, for their very presence was highly unusual among gentleman’s clubs of the Philosophers’ social caliber.   Even the Royal Society’s own anniversary dinners lacked such details, although the Thursday’s Club clearly appropriated their institutional parent’s enthusiasm for collection and record.  Just as scientific understandings of the natural world and the peoples who inhabited it were intimately bound up with the cataloguing of plants, foods, tastes and preferences, so too did the systematic transcription and collection of bills of fare harness eating to the scientific method.  The stylized presentation of foods upon the table each week closely resembled the presentation of curiosities at official Royal Society meetings, which, as Palmira Fontes da Costa has argued, served to stimulate the mind, sharpen the wit, and pleasure the imagination all at once.  

The bills of fare thus represented far more than an assortment of comestibles preserved exclusively for posterity’s amusement.  Taken together, they repackaged the dinner as a feat of cultural appreciation –– of English taste –– rather than a fulfillment of mortal needs.  All goods necessarily emanate important messages about rank; thus, by organizing the basic components of the meal (fowl, fish, vegetables, sweets) and establishing a hierarchy of alimentary value (gift versus non-gift, game versus butcher’s meat) the bill of fare defined the criteria by which food choices could qualify as performances of gentlemanly taste.  

Dissecting the meaning of the Thursday’s Club’s dinners is not an easy task.  Food and feasting studies are still in their disciplinary infancies.   In fact, today’s most compelling analytical approaches to meals come to us not from historians but from social anthropologists.  Two such strategies inform my analysis.  The first, laid out in Claude Levi-Strauss’s The Raw and the Cooked (1964), outlined basic grammatical rules that structured the mind as well as the societies we inhabit today.  Departing from the earlier functionalist approaches that examined surface relationships between existing social institutions, Levi-Strauss conceptualized the meal’s components as cultural reflections of latent symbolic structures that organized all human thought.  The second strategy, laid out by the British social anthropologist Mary Douglas, embraces many of Levi Strauss’s ideas but with a more culturally specific approach.  Similar to Levi-Strauss, Douglas viewed the meal as a “structured social event” that by the same logic shaped all other meals consumed in that society, which consequently unmasked similar analogies present in other realms of culture.  Yet she, as well as many other scholars, did not remain comfortable with the totalizing universality of Levi-Strauss’s claims.  Unlike Levi-Strauss, Douglas situated the meal within a wider span of temporal patterns –– days, weeks, seasons –– in which local relationships –– births, weddings, deaths –– organized the ways in which meals were consumed and imbued with meaning. 

In what follows, I deconstruct the Thursday’s Club’s meals as part of a historical anthropology of the gentlemanly English taste.  From following Levi-Strauss, I interpret the components of the meal as a language of coded assumptions that underpinned the existing social order.  From following Douglas, I isolate latent alimentary categories combined in different ways to create a coherent and recognizable meal.  By unveiling the patterns embedded within close to 2000 transcribed bills of fare, I illuminate the basic ‘grammar’ upon which English connoisseurship depended.  Some types of analysis, of course, are not possible.  For example, it is impossible to measure changes in tastes for sweet or salty foods, as Colebrooke transcribed only the dishes before him, not the recipes used to prepare them.  Nevertheless, elucidating the general structure of the meal offers us new insights into the values imparted by selecting particular foods and the rationales by which they were given meaning.  

The Grammar of Connoisseurship

The vast majority of food enjoyed at the Philosophers’ table was that prepared and served each week by the Mitre’s cooks as part of the pre-ordered commons.  These dishes rarely possessed the Continental flair evoked by the club’s guest lists.   To 21st century eyes, they might not seem very elegant at all.  While French meals were structured by various entrees and entremets, hors d’oeuvres and centerpieces, there is no obvious center to the Thursday’s Club’s dinners.   But just because the bill of fare did not follow the classical structure of French cuisine does not mean that it had no underlying logic to it.  In fact, these weekly entertainments broadcast the Royal Society’s particular social and political values to a remarkably diverse group of cosmopolitan guests.  The first of these values was hospitality.  While French inspired nouvelle cuisine frequently drew criticism for wastefulness, reducing large joints of meat into dainty portions fit for only one man, the Club consistently offered caloric abundance to its visitors.  The club dined on an average of 11 dishes per meeting, although up to 20 different dishes were brought to table when attendance was particularly high.  On only two occasions were extra dishes ordered in addition to the commons.  Diners rarely left the Club table hungry. 

While the identity of the cooks who prepared the food at the Mitre is unknown –– they are acknowledged only in the meager annual tips recorded each year in the minute books –– this does not mean that the quality of the food was any less important to the Club’s identity.  Yet the Thursday’s Club’s definition of quality differed from that associated with nouvelle cuisine. The dishes listed on the club’s bills of fare contrasted sharply with the refined cullises, puptons and frivolous little “kickshaws” supposedly prepared by French expert cooks.  While the cook trained in courtly nouvelle cuisine was valued for his training and expertise, the Club’s bill of fare placed more stress on the principal ingredients of each dish.  Colebrooke reported 25 different species of fish enjoyed at the table between 1748-1775, which were served in simple preparations: by frying, broiling, or boiling. 

The Club’s definition of quality also privileged joints of butcher’s meat –– chines of mutton, sirloins of beef, breasts of veal, and loins of house-lamb –– over “made dishes,” that is, more ingredient-heavy dishes that required sauces and seasoning to prepare. This did not apply to every made dish.  Traditional English dishes that relied heavily on organ meats, such as tongues and udders, calves heads and bacon, and from the 1760s on, mock turtle, were heartily enjoyed throughout the span of the records.  But even though Continental-style fricassees and ragouts had appeared in English cookbooks for decades, these dishes came under harsh criticism from culinary patriots.  Critics accused the sauces, essences and restaurants associated with nouvelle cuisine of merely disguising inferior cuts of meat and rotting leftovers with strong seasonings and garnishes to which an elaborate title was appended.  Little surprise, then, that the fashionable ragout and the fricassee made their first respective appearances only in 1758 and 1763, and thereafter were served only about one or two times a year.   Not until the 1770s did dishes such as “beef tails a la braise” and “soup santé” appear beside the chops and pies heretofore enjoyed at the club for decades, as did explicitly internationally themed dishes: Italian collops, Dutch water soucheys of flounder, curry and pillow rice.  But despite their novelty and desirability, these dishes were regarded as edible curiosities rather than essential components of the meal.  A minute recorded in 1776 defined the dinner as “made up with the best beef stakes, mutton chops, lamb chop, veal cutlets or pork stakes instead of made dishes, or any dearer provisions.”  And as late as 1784, a visiting French geologist described the dishes as “of the solid kind, such as roast beef, boiled beef and mutton prepared in various ways, with [an] abundance of potatoes and other vegetables, which each person seasoned as he pleased with the different sauces which were placed on the table in bottles of various shapes.”  “The dinner,” he concluded, was “truly in the English style.” 

The wealth of selection was another way for the Thursday’s Club to exhibit its mastery over nature.  Virtually every dinner included animals from the land, air, and sea, served both roasted and boiled.  The ubiquity of butcher’s meat testified to the advancements in animal husbandry.  Some dinners, particularly during the late spring, managed to showcase beef, mutton, lamb, veal, and pork all at the same time.   At the same time, the four most frequently occurring fish, exhibited below, were consistently served only as they came into season each year, testifying to their freshness.

 
Figure 4: Seasonal Patterns of Fish Consumption: 1748-1757

The provision of desserts also showcased the continuous bounty of the English landscape.  While fresh fruit never appeared on the regular bill of fare, only as a gift, the constitution of pies, puddings, and tarts allowed members to sample the apples, pears, gooseberries, currants, damsons, plums, and cherries currently in season.  While cheesecakes and several French style desserts were tested during the 1780s, it was rare for desserts not to include at least one of these fruits.  Out of everything on the bill of fare, desserts changed the least from the 1740s to the 1780s. 

While patterns of fruit consumption changed little over time, the Club’s appreciation of vegetables expanded considerably.  Perhaps the changing patterns of vegetable consumption best convey the club’s interest in showcasing its mastery over nature.  With the exception of artichokes, which had important associations with nobility, and asparagus, which required considerably more labor and expertise to produce in London’s market gardens, vegetables rarely appeared on the club’s early bill of fare.  When they did appear they were often classified only as “greens,” and showed up as accompaniments to meat dishes rather than stand-alone dishes.   This gradually changed over the 1760s and 1770s, when broccoli, spinach, cauliflower, endives, carrots, cucumbers, celery and French beans began to be regularly included in the bill of fare.  By the 1770s, the number of vegetable dishes had doubled overall.  While “salad” appeared a paltry 19 times from 1748-1752 (and always as an accompaniment to a meat dish, never on its own) the club members enjoyed stand-alone salads over 140 times between 1780-1785.  The season in which vegetables were consumed also expanded dramatically.  Once served exclusively in June, by the 1780s cauliflower was also eaten in December and January.  The spinach season likewise expanded to cover the entire fall, winter and spring.  By the 1780s, the number of vegetable dishes served in winter had increased eight-fold. 

While the bill of fare gradually began to incorporate more French influences such as soups and made dishes, the structure of the club meal remained remarkably stable over time.  Value was constituted in abundance, variety, and the dish’s proximity to the land.  Emphasis on exclusively local ingredients gleaned during the appropriate season elicited collective memories of hospitality, tradition, and Arcadian community supposedly absent from the fast-paced urbanity of London.  Most importantly, the bill of fare scripted a standard of English taste next to which others could be measured.  Over time, it determined the conditions under which some foods qualified as tasteful as others did not. 

Connoisseurship and the Politics of Edible Gifts

On August 4, 1748, the Thursday’s Club received its first gift of venison from a fellow colleague of the Royal Society, the Honorable Philip Yorke.  The members present were delighted, and immediately ordered four bottles of claret to celebrate the occasion.  The cooks at the Mitre prepared the venison in three ways: as a haunch, as a neck, and as a pasty.  At the next meeting, the following rule was appended to the minute book:   

“Resolved nem con that any Nobleman or Gentleman Complimenting this company annually with Venison not less than a haunch, shall during the continuance of such annuity be deemed an Honorary Member and admitted as often as he comes, without paying the fine which those members do who are Elected by Ballot.”

Venison was not an uncommon gift in early modern culture.  For centuries the hunt had symbolized the power of landed privilege as well as the social obligations of charity and hospitality that these privileges entailed.   These associations persisted into the 18th century.  The ability to provide venison was as important as the privilege of consuming it.  The Waltham Black Acts, passed in 1723, rendered poaching punishable by death.  Philip Yorke’s venison gift thus transported patronage relationships out of the traditional realm of the household and into the apparent fraternalism of urban intellectual life.  

Within its first two years, the Royal Philosophers extended this provision also to donors of turtle and extraordinarily large chines of beef, beginning a rich and varied tradition of edible gifting.   An annual donation of any of these three foods bestowed its giver with honorary status in the Thursday’s Club, a special toast to his health in claret, and an official word of thanks personally delivered, thus inviting aristocratic patronage and participation in their club’s activities.  Over the thirty-eight years of its records, 214 haunches of venison, 21 turtles, and 3 haunches of beef were gifted to the society.   

 
Figure 5: Venison and Turtle Dinners
While turtle remained a coveted delicacy, venison was gifted with far greater frequency

Venison, turtle, and beef were not ennobled for their monetary value, but rather for their detachment from the market.  All of them upheld the typically English penchant for glorifying the integrity of the ingredients, and the expertise used to attain them, as opposed to the artfulness of the chef.  Not only was each food regarded as the best of its ‘class’ –– venison and turtle apotheosizing their respective terrestrial and aquatic kingdoms–– but each creature also emblematized the contributions of a different social order to the Royal Society’s success and prosperity.  Venison, as mentioned above, conveyed landed aristocratic power and the cultural importance of patronage.  While “any nobleman or gentleman” was technically eligible to receive honorary membership by presenting these gifts to the society, honorary membership in practice was virtually confined to the few who had privileged access to these special foods.  Over the club’s history, only two powerful aristocrats –– Philip Yorke and the Anthony Cooper, the 4th Earl of Shaftesbury –– sent the Thursday’s Club enough venison to maintain their honorary status.  Aristocratic largesse was also incorporated into seasonal cycles.  While there was a recognized venison ‘season,’ which lasted from June to September, donors also timed their gifts with such precision that they showed up on the club table on the same week of each year. 

Turtle, by contrast, had not always been so esteemed an English dish.  For most of the early modern period, it was considered the food of savages.  Imperial physicians deemed it useful nourishment for sailors, as they considered its flesh an antidote to scurvy and venereal disease.  Yet turtle was more of a necessity than a choice for English colonists.  After all, beef and veal raised in Jamaica’s oppressive and infectious climate tasted terrible, cost four times as much, and rotted in a matter of hours.   Turtle was nourishing when it needed to be, but only provisionally did it count as food.   When it did emerge as an elite delicacy during the 1740s and 1750s, it called attention to the buccaneering patriotism usually associated with enterprising younger sons rather than courtly refinement.   Communal consumption of this luxury testified to the optimism and seemingly limitless possibilities offered by the expanding Empire.  The turtle’s unique taste –– some thought it tasted like beef, some like chicken, some marveled at its texture, with “the consistency of butter” –– allowed club members to viscerally participate in the state’s overseas expansion. 

Luxurious food gifts always came with strings attached, potentially arousing suspicions of pretense and bribery.  In the Athenian Letters, Cleander had criticized the ostentation of Athenian animal sacrifices because, first, they made light of the fact that all animals actually belonged to the Gods and not men, and, second, they were given with an expectation of reciprocation.  Thus, as in the regular bill of fare, gifts of venison, turtle, and beef sought to encapsulate the patriotic values with which the Thursday’s Club practiced food connoisseurship.  While the foppish epicures and gormandizers satirized in the moral weeklies ate as a form of effeminate social display, members of the Thursday’s Club ate to showcase a more timeless virtue.  Consumption of venison and turtle both evoked the masculine exo-cuisine of the hunt; they were both large, calorie-heavy foods that were procured independently, in contrast to the domesticated animals prepared for consumption within the Mitre’s kitchen.  This quality also extended to beef, which albeit not hunted nevertheless had developed powerful associations with patriotism by the mid 18th century.    Chines of beef also had to be sufficiently large to qualify; Colebrooke proclaimed the proportions of a three-foot long present as truly “Homerian.”  Sea turtles, likewise, could be so large that they often dwarfed the kitchens and dining rooms in which they were consumed.  (Colebrooke recorded his displeasure when news of another club feasting on a 400 pounder in 1749 forced them to leave their usual clubroom.)  These special foods were also prepared to promote commensality under the auspices of aristocratic privilege and patriotism.  Venison gifts were divided into haunches, necks, and pasties.  One thirty-pound turtle, likewise, could create five to six different dishes and feed a large family; it was the epitome of head to tail cooking. Even the turtle’s shell doubled as a communal bowl, evoking an authentic form of fellowship that predated history and time.  In a society bedeviled by artifice and foppery at every turn, feasting on venison, turtle, and beef promoted conversation free from the trappings of polite civility, thus consecrating genuine social bonds among men.  

Culinary scholars have tended to assume that the cultural identities of foodstuffs remained more stable across the 18th century than they actually did, as if the context of the meal was ancillary to the food itself.  But the consumption of venison and turtle meant very different things in new contexts.  The enlightened company with which the Thursday’s Club dined also ensured that these edible luxuries did not pose a moral threat to the diners’ health.  As Hume had pointed out in 1752, pursuit of refinement became a problem only insofar as it encroached on another virtue.   The fine line between tasteful connoisseurship and carnal indulgence was thus socially determined.  The company of learned men from around the world and the all-important ethos in hospitality imparted pedagogical meaning on forms of consumption that might otherwise be suspected for their corrupting potential.  This might well have exhorted the Scottish inventor James Watt to rationalize his turtle dinners with the club in his letters, attesting in 1780 that “never was turtle eaten with greater sobriety and temperance, or more good fellowship.”   

Venison, turtle, and beef were not the only foods presented to the Thursday’s Club.  Gifts of fruits, being fragile and perishable, were frequent gifts to the society.  Over the course of the records, F.R.S. Philip Miller, keeper of the Chelsea Physic Garden, presented pineapples that Colebrooke deemed “excellent good,” cantaloupes he believed “superior in flavour to pineapples,” and several sorts of Cos and “Aegyptian Lettuces” that he had cultivated himself and glowingly wrote about in his well-received handbook The Gardener’s Dictionary (1735).  The second Earl of Macclesfield, who doubled as the Royal Society’s President from 1752-1764, presented cornucopias of pineapples, apricots, grapes, and fat Carolina strawberries cultivated on his own estate.  The club also received ample gifts of fish over the 18th century.  Hugh Hume, the third Earl of Marchmont, frequently sent the club salmon “pickled in the way it is pickled to the East Indies” that Colebrooke delightedly described as “the most excellent of its kind.”  In 1753, the Earl of Morton presented the club with tusk (a delicate fish found in the northernmost tip of Scotland) and then, in 1764, followed up with a gift of “two pigs of the China breed” that the Mitre’s cooks served to the Club roasted.  

As Felicity Heal and others have shown, rare and unusual foods had been used for centuries as prestige gifts.  Yet these gifts differed from those typical in the 16th and 17th centuries.  As they were eaten in the controlled setting of the Mitre, the ritual presentation of gifts gave each man present ample chance to personally evaluate his taste among learned experts.  Like venison and turtle, it mattered that these foods never appeared on the regular bill of fare and were technically unsolicited, distinguishing them from the other foods consumed by the club.  These foods did not evoke the same collective emotional bonds among men that did venison, turtle, or beef.  Nor did they yield for their givers anything beyond a sincere word of gratitude.  Nevertheless, within the intimacy of the club, they worked as edible forms of self-presentation, calling attention to the donor’s expertise, his curiosity, and his taste.  It was likely that there was also a competitive element to the provision of these foods, suggested by the two watermelons gifted by two different members on consecutive weeks.  Unlike venison, which was often sent by distant well-wishers as edible proxies for their physical presence, these ancillary gifts denoted a greater intimacy among giver and receiver, as they were personally gifted by members who had already worked their way into the club’s inner circle.  Further, since there were no stringent requirements for presenting an edible gift to the club, gifting also enabled men of common birth to emulate the manners and largesse of the aristocracy. Both Josiah Colebrooke and Thomas Birch occasionally presented freshwater fish such as perch, pike, carp, and potted charr to the club table.  While not terribly novel or rare, these freshwater fish differed substantially from the usual tavern fare that almost exclusively featured saltwater fish.  No matter how humble, the exchange of food gifts enabled givers to demonstrate their loyalty to the Club by participating in the culture of connoisseurship.  Presenting a gift dignified the giver’s personal taste insofar as it maintained natural social distinctions between men.

In 1779, shortly after Joseph Banks’ ascension to the Presidency, a new rule in the minutes decreed “no person in the future be admitted a member of this society in consequence of any present he shall make to it.”  It is not difficult to surmise why this rule was passed.  First began in 1749, Philip Yorke’s venison gifts had functioned as thinly veiled codes for the Hardwicke circle’s continuous patronage of the Thursday’s club. Whoever controlled the club, Banks quickly realized, also wielded considerable influence over the Royal Society. Banks’s new regime thus acknowledged the social power concentrated in the provision and consumption of these special foods.  Indeed, while he outlawed any special privilege from being gleaned from gift giving –– an act that specifically targeted Yorke’s circle –– Banks still attempted to facilitate connoisseurship of marked English delicacies.  He provided venison to the club both before and after his election: in 1773, 1774, 1776, 1777, and twice in 1782.  In 1783, Banks’s largesse provided members a turtle feast. 

But the reasons for the dethroning of venison, turtle, and beef also went beyond the internal politics of the Royal Society.  Venison and turtle, once impossible to procure without land and connections, had now become commodities widely available for purchase, either by dealers or in taverns open to the public.  As the meaning of edible gifts had formerly depended on the gift’s detachment from market forces, special foods no longer accorded their giver the same status as they once had.  Now, men of means but inferior rank and learning also could present themselves as food connoisseurs, creating a dramatically larger spectrum of competing tastemakers.  No longer was it necessary to join an exclusive club in order to enjoy rare and exotic food, even though for decades it continued to be the most effective way to do so.  Even so, the individual dishes consumed at the Thursday’s Club’s table eventually lost some of the commensal significance that they once enjoyed.  In 1786, the club ceased to record its bill of fare in the dinner books altogether.  Yet in many ways, the Club’s work had already been achieved.  Linking connoisseurship to ideals of gentility, expertise, and Englishness empowered elites to dictate what social groups were entitled to cultivate taste at all.  


